# Remediations

The `remediation` role is to assist in the remediation of a system. This role contains multiple playbooks that can be used to remediate a system for a specific inhibitors that are found during the pre-upgrade analysis.

**IMPORTANT:** Not all remediations are applicable to all upgrade paths, see the remediation variables list below.

## Running Remediation Generated from the Analysis Role

Analysis role generates hostvars files for each node that runs pre-upgrade.
It reads pre-upgrade reports and matches found inhibitors to available remediations.

`analysis` role creates the directory `host_vars` in the `{{ leapp_workdir_controller }}` directory.
It generates variable files that set the `leapp_remediation_todo` variable with available remediations for existing inhibitors, based on each node's pre-upgrade report.

The role also generates a `remediate.yml` playbook that you can use to run remediation for all nodes.

**Use at your own risk!**
Note that remediations that this role provides example remediations for the very common scenarios.
Some remediations can be destructive, some might not do what is needed exactly at your case.
It is your responsibility to verify that what they do is suitable for your environment.

### Running Remediations

To run remediations generated by running the analysis role, complete the following steps:

1. After running the analysis role, view if it has generated any variables files at the `{{ leapp_workdir_controller }}` directory:
    ```
    $ ls host_vars
    ```

2. If yes, view the generated files and the variables that they set.
Each variable represents a task file within this role's `tasks` directory.
View which tasks are suggested to be run to fix found inhibitors, modify to your needs or write new tasks if needed.

3. Run the playbook `remediate.yml` that the analysis role generated at the `{{ leapp_workdir_controller }}` directory:
    ```
    $ ansible-playbook -i <inventory> remediate.yml
    ```

## Role variables

| Name                              | Type    | Default value                                       | Description |
|-----------------------------------|---------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------|
| leapp_report_location             | String  | "/var/log/leapp/leapp-report.json"                  | Location of the leapp report file. |
| leapp_remediation_playbooks       | List    | see [Remediation playbooks](#remediation-playbooks) | List of available remediation playbooks. |
| leapp_remediation_todo            | List    | []                                                  | List of remediation playbooks to run. |
| leapp_reboot_timeout              | Int     | 7200                                                | Integer for maximum seconds to wait for reboot to complete. |
| leapp_pre_reboot_delay            | Int     | 60                                                  | Integer to pass to the reboot pre_reboot_delay option. |
| leapp_post_reboot_delay           | Int     | 120                                                 | Integer to pass to the reboot post_reboot_delay option. |
| leapp_remediate_ssh_password_auth | Boolean | true                                                | Add "PasswordAuthentcation no" and "PermitRootLogin prohibit-password" to sshd config |
| leapp_system_roles_collection     | String  | "fedora.linux_system_roles"                         | Set which Ansible Collection to use for System Roles. For community/upstream, use "fedora.linux_system_roles". For the RHEL, AAP, use "redhat.rhel_system_roles". |

NOTE: If you use password authentication for Ansible (`--user root --ask-pass`), then setting `leapp_remediate_ssh_password_auth: true`
might lock out your Ansible session and the play will fail.

`leapp_remediation_todo` is a list of remediation playbooks to run. The list is empty by default. The list can be populated by the titles from [Remediation playbooks](#remediation-playbooks) section. For example:

```yaml
leapp_remediation_todo:
  - leapp_cifs_detected
  - leapp_corrupted_grubenv_file
```

## Remediation playbooks

The list of available remediation playbooks with their corresponding inhibitors titles:

- `leapp_cgroups-v1_enabled`
  - RHEL 9 only
  - **Solves:** cgroups-v1 enabled on the system
- `leapp_cifs_detected`
  - **Solves:** Use of CIFS detected. Upgrade can't proceed.  CIFS is currently not supported by the inplace upgrade.
- `leapp_corrupted_grubenv_file`
  - **Solves:** Detected a corrupted grubenv file.
- `leapp_custom_network_scripts_detected`
  - RHEL 8 Only
  - **Solves:** custom network-scripts detected. RHEL 9 does not support the legacy network-scripts package that was deprecated in RHEL 8.
- `leapp_deprecated_sshd_directive`
  - RHEL 8 Only
  - **Solves:** A deprecated directive in the sshd configuration.
- `leapp_firewalld_allowzonedrifting`
  - RHEL 8 Only
  - **Solves:** Firewalld Configuration AllowZoneDrifting Is Unsupported.
- `leapp_firewalld_unsupported_tftp_client`
  - RHEL 8 Only
  - **Solves:** Firewalld Service tftp-client Is Unsupported.
- `leapp_legacy_network_configuration`
  - RHEL 9 only
  - **Solves:** Legacy network configuration found
- `leapp_loaded_removed_kernel_drivers`
  - **Solves:** Leapp detected loaded kernel drivers which have been removed in RHEL 8. Upgrade cannot proceed.
- `leapp_missing_efibootmgr`
  - **Solves:** efibootmgr package is required on EFI systems.
- `leapp_missing_pkg`
  - **Solves:** Leapp detected missing packages.
- `leapp_missing_yum_plugins`
  - **Solves:** Required DNF plugins are not being loaded.
- `leapp_multiple_kernels`
  - **Solves:** Multiple kernels installed. **Requires reboot.**
- `leapp_newest_kernel_not_in_use`
  - **Solves:** Newest installed kernel not in use. **Requires reboot.**
- `leapp_nfs_detected`
  - **Solves:** Use of NFS detected. Upgrade can't proceed.
- `leapp_non_persistent_partitions`
  - **Solves:** Detected partitions mounted in a non-persistent fashion, preventing a successful in-place upgrade.
- `leapp_non_standard_openssl_config`
  - RHEL 8 Only
  - **Solves:** Non-standard configuration of openssl.cnf.
- `leapp_old_postgresql_data`
  - **Solves:** Old PostgreSQL data found in `/var/lib/pgsql/data`.
- `leapp_pam_tally2`
  - RHEL 7 Only
  - **Solves:** The pam_tally2 pam module(s) no longer available
- `leapp_partitions_with_noexec`
  - **Solves:** Detected partitions mounted with the `noexec` option, preventing a successful in-place upgrade.
- `leapp_relative_symlinks`
  - **Solves:** Upgrade requires links in root directory to be relative
- `leapp_remote_using_root`
  - RHEL 7 Only
  - **Solves:** Possible problems with remote login using root account
- `leapp_rpms_with_rsa_sha1_detected`
  - RHEL 8 Only
  - **Solves:** Detected RPMs with RSA/SHA1 signature.
- `leapp_unavailable_kde`
  - **Solves:** The installed KDE environment is unavailable on RHEL 8.
- `leapp_vdo_check_needed`
  - RHEL 8 Only
  - **Solves:** Cannot perform the VDO check of block devices.

## Example playbook

See [`remediate.yml`](https://github.com/redhat-cop/infra.leapp/tree/main/playbooks/remediate.yml).

## Authors

Peter Zdravecký, Ryan Bontreger

## License

MIT
